Reading for this week: Book:
Molecular Biology Chapters 7.1, 7.2
Review: Transcription activation by catabolite activator protein (CAP). Busby, S. and Ebright, R.H. J Mol Biol. 1999 Oct 22;293(2):199-213.
Bacterial nucleoid-associated proteins, nucleoid structure and gene expression. Dillon, S.C. and Dorman C.J. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2010 Mar;8(3):185-95.
Journal Club Paper (to be presented the following week): A phage-encoded nucleoid associated protein compacts both host and phage DNA and derepresses H-NS silencing. Son B, Patterson-West J, Arroyo-Mendoza M, Ramachandran R, Iben JR, Zhu J, Rao V, Dimitriadis EK, Hinton DM. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab678.
1Points for the lecture:
Transcription can be actively regulated
Small molecules can control gene programs
Operons help balance protein expression in a pathway
Protein allostery
Transcription factors can bend DNA
2Role of Regulatory Proteins in Transcription Initiation
•Regulatory proteins bind to specific DNA sequences (operator/response element)
and control initiation of transcription
•Repressors - regulatory proteins that prevent transcription of a negatively regulated
gene
*negatively regulated genes can only be transcribed in the absence of
the repressor
•Activators - regulatory proteins that activate transcription of a positively regulated
gene
•Repressors and Activators are often allosteric proteins modified by ligand binding
•Agonist - positively acting ligand
•Antagonist - negatively acting ligand
3Activator Strategies for Transcriptional Regulation
Ligand binding triggers promoter association
and RNA is produced
Ligand binding triggers promoter dissociation
and RNA is not produced
4Repressor Strategies for Transcriptional Regulation
Ligand binding triggers promoter dissociation
and RNA is produced
Ligand binding triggers promoter association
and RNA is not produced
5Operators (bacteria)/Response Elements (eukaryotes)
How do you find an Operator/Response Element?
6What and Where are Operators?
Many TFs bind inverted
repeats as dimers
More interactions =
greater affinity
7Promoter ‘Bashing’
lacZ
lacZ
lacZ
lacZ
lacZ
lacZ
lacZ
lacZ
lacZ
lacZ
8Linker-scanner Mutagenesis to Refine Position of Promoter Proximal Elements
9Operon
Bacteria and viruses often express functionally
operative genes from a single promoter to help insure
uniform expression
10Lactose (Lac) Operon
11The Operon Model
A landmark in the history of Molecular Biology was the
proposal of the operon model of genetic regulation by
François Jacob and Jacques Monod in 1961.
The core of the model was that the level of proteins in cells
was controlled at a genetic level. The theory also predicted
the existence of mRNA-an unstable intermediate between
the genome and the expressed protein.
Before this work the prevailing model was called the
instruction hypothesis that stated that all proteins were
present in a cell, but that in the absence of an inducer they
were not properly folded and were inactive.
Jacob and Monod were awarded the Nobel Prize in 1965
for their work on characterising genes involved in lactose
utilization
12Differential Growth based on Carbon Source
Glucose
Lactose
Glucose is more rapidly used than
lactose, so cells grow faster on
glucose.
Time
Mix of glucose
and lactose
When both present growth is bi-
phasic, which is called a diauxic
shift.
13
Cell numberBiological Purpose of Lac Operon
LacZ gene: encodes  -galactosidase
enzyme that breaks down disaccharide
lactose into glucose and galactose to
be used as source of energy for cell.
LacY gene: encodes  -galactoside
permease, a membrane-bound protein
that helps transport lactose across the
membrane of cell.
LacA gene: encodes  -galactoside
transacetylase enzyme involved in
catabolism of disaccharide (exact role
is less clear)
14Genetic Screen Based on Enzymatic Activity
5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-D-galactoside
‘X-GAL’
15Natural & Synthetic Small Molecules
IPTG is a non-metabolized analog of
allolactose that induces Lac operon
but is not broken down by enzymes.
Lactose is a disaccharide composed of galactose and glucose linked in a  configuration (1->4). -galactosidase, the product
of the lacZ gene, cleaves this disaccharide into galactose and glucose which can then both be metabolized by the cell. E. coli
does not always make this enzyme. It is an inducible enzyme which is synthesized only when lactose is present and when
glucose is absent from the growth media. Glucose is one of the few sugars which E. coli will use preferentially over all other
sugars because it can be directly routed into glycolysis after phosphorylation without any other modifications.
16Merodiploids Helped to Unravel the Role of Genes in the lac operon
17Studying the Lac Operon
Isolation and analysis of mutants defective in Lac operon function allowed Jacob and Monod to formulate an accurate Lac operon
model PRIOR to the advent of molecular cloning
e.g., wild type E. coli form colonies that are blue on IPTG/ XGAL plates and white on XGAL plates
Mutants that form white colonies on IPTG/XGAL plates can be isolated
* this phenotype is often due to a mutation in a Lac structural gene
* the number and location of Lac structural genes can be identified by complementation analysis
Mutants that form blue colonies on XGAL (no IPTG) can be isolated
* this phenotype is often due to a mutation in either the Lac repressor gene or Lac operator
* Lac repressor versus operator mutations can be distinguished by cis-trans test
F' plasmids carrying different pieces of E. coli chromosome can be isolated in HFR strains, allowing the creation of partial diploids.
F' plasmid can carry wild type or mutant versions of Lac operon between strains
18Complementation Analysis and Cis-Trans Tests
Phenotypes and Genotypes of Mutants Defective in Lac Operon Function
* Lower case letter with superscript asterisk indicates location of mutation
* In practice, you would not know the location; you would only know the phenotypes (blue or white color on
XGAL/IPTG or XGAL) of the haploid (or homozygous diploid) and the heterozygous diploid
e.g., The diploid resulting from conjugating mutants 2 and 3 give a normal phenotype, consistent with mutations 1 and 2 being
recessive and located in different structural genes (i.e., in the diploid there is at least one normal copy of each gene and a
correspondingly normal protein)
Trans
Cis
19‘Trans’ and ‘Cis’
In genetic terminology:
The lac repressor is a trans-
acting element
trans = across
The operator is a cis-acting
element
cis=near
The lac repressor is a sequence-specific DNA-binding protein that Negatively regulates
expression of the lac operon structural genes.
20Trans Complementation
Merodiploid: lacZ - / F’ lacY -
lacI
lacO lacZ
lacY
lacA
lacI
lacO
lacZ
lacY lacA
21‘Simple’ Mechanism for Gene Regulation by Lac Repressor
22Lactose Levels “Tune” the Response
In the absence of
lactose there are only 1
-5 molecules of each of
the lacZYA proteins in
the cell. Following
induction, up to 5000
molecules of -
galactosidase can
accumulate within
minutes.
As lactose is cleaved and used as a carbon source for growth the
lactose levels drop. Eventually free repressor molecules will
accumulate once more and the lac operon will be switched off.
23Impact of Inducer on Repressor DNA binding
24Protein Allostery (Induced Conformational Changes)
25Repression by Steric Interference?
1 -- DNA sequence ladder
2 -- DNA sequence ladder
3 -- No protein
4 -- (+) RNA polymerase
5 -- (+) lac repressor
26Lac Repressor Does Not Prevent RNAP Binding
Abortive
Transcripts
27What is the Mechanism of Repression?
28Influence of Regulators on RNAP:Promoter Complexes
A great deal of information about RNA polymerase and its interactions with promoters can be obtained by measuring the two parameters
of promoter strength: KB and k2. The effect of auxilliary proteins such as repressors or activators on these two parameters can also be
measured to see whether formation of a closed complex or formation of an open complex is affected by the presence of the additional
protein.
Since KB is, to a first approximation, a measure of the binding of RNA polymerase to a promoter, any effect of a repressor or an activator
on the value of this parameter may be interpreted as an indicator that binding of RNA polymerase is affected by the repressor or
activator.
It is more difficult to ascribe any physical meaning to k2 since this parameter measures the rate-limiting step in open complex formation
which may not necessarily be the same for any two promoters. Still, any effect of a repressor or an activator on the value of this parameter
can be interpreted as influencing an aspect of RNA polymerase - promoter interaction.
29Impact of Repressor on RNAP
At the lacUV5 promoter, the values of KB and k2 in the presence or absence of repressor are:
KB k2
No repressor1.9 x 107 M-1
With repressor2.5 x 109 M-1
6.7 x 10-2 s-1
2.5 x 10-2 s-1
(1) Data from Straney & Crothers (1987) Cell 51: 699-707.
(2) The UV5 mutation changes the -10 region of the lacP promoter so that it more
closely resembles the consensus -10 sequence. It is a stronger promoter than lacP.
These data indicate that the lactose repressor INCREASES the binding of RNAP 130-fold; suggest that repressor might be
considered a activator. Repressor DECREASES k2 3-fold.
30Repressor Dimers Bind on Same Face of DNA
Repression maxima were observed when two operators were spaced apart at distances of 59.5, 70.5, 81.5, 92.5,
115.5 and 150.5 nm -- i.e., distances which are integral multiples of the pitch of a DNA double helix. The 92.5
spacer distance is exactly that found in the wild-type lac operon; the 115.5 spacer distance is exactly that found
between the two operators in the gal operon.
This effect could be observed over longer spacer distances, though in those cases, it was a smaller effect.
Distances longer than 400 bp showed little or no effect.
At all spacer distances that were not integral multiples of the pitch of a DNA double helix, no repression was
observed. This is consistent with a DNA looping model in which two proteins bound on the same face of a DNA
molecule can interact relatively easily but as soon as interaction requires any torsional change in DNA, then it
becomes negligible.
Effects could not be measured at distances less than 59.5 since those constructs would interfere with the
promoter.
From the repression maxima, they estimated that the DNA pitch in vivo is 11.1 bp or 3.4 nm.
31Repressor Binds as a Tetramer
32DNA Bending Enables
Proteins to Bind Cooperatively to Separated Sites
No bending
bending
BEND FORMATION REQUIRES
THAT BOTH PROTEINS BIND TO
THE SAME FACE OF THE DNA
PROTEINS BOUND TO SITES ON
OPPOSITE SIDES OF DNA HELIX
CANNOT INTERACT
33Lac Tetramer Stabilizes Bent DNA
34Detected by EMSA
35Promoter Contains 3 Operator Sites
36How to Resolve if Operator 2 or 3 is preferred?
Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) Assay
Determines the relative DNA Occupancy of a Target
Protein at a Particular Site in vivo
37ChIP-Seq can Determine Genome-wide Binding Site Useage of a Target Protein
38Lac Repressor Binding
39Multiple Regulators
